---
title: Markov-modulated Models Tutorial
keywords: Markov-modulated, ctmc, tutorial
last_updated: May 2, 2019
tags: [tutorial]
summary: "Constructing Markov-modulated substitution model XML files for use with BEAST."
sidebar: beast_sidebar
permalink: markov_modulated.html
folder: beast
---

## Markov-modulated Models Tutorial

A Markov-modulated model (MMM) is an extension of the standard nucleotide substitution model that allows the substitution process at a site to change over time.
Such an MMM is constructed by using a combination of multiple continuous-time Markov chain (CTMC) models such as the HKY and GTR models.
In this tutorial, we show how to construct MMMs by using combinations of 2 and 3 CTMC models of the same type, i.e. always HKY or always GTR, which will effectively yield an 8x8 and a 12x12 dimensional MMM.

We already note that the increased dimensionality of MMMs will lead to increased computation times for the corresponding BEAST analysis.
However, this can largely be mitigated by running the analysis on a powerful GPU; we assess the computational performance of these MMMs on different hardware in our manuscript (Baele *et al.*, 2019).
Despite the increased computational demands of MMM analyses, these models can be compared to one another and to popular nucleotide substitution models using (log) marginal likelihood estimation.

We refer to Gascuel and Guindon (2007) and our own manuscript (Baele *et al.*, 2019) for a detailed overview of MMMs in phylogenetics.
We also provide additional useful reading material in the references section of this tutorial.


## Prerequisites

This tutorial requires that you have a standard BEAST XML, as for example generated by BEAUti using an HKY or GTR model, at the ready.


## Adjusting the data type of the analysis

When creating a BEAST XML through BEAUti, one or more ```<alignment>``` XML elements are created that contain the genetic data of your alignment.
We here assume that only a single such XML element is created, but the same principles in this tutorial apply when creating multiple ```<alignment>``` blocks, for example in an alignment containing multiple genes.
For nucleotide data, this XML element will look like this:

```xml
<alignment id="alignment" dataType="nucleotide">
...
</alignment>
```

When constructing an 8x8 MMM composed of two CTMC models, this XML element needs to be adjusted as follows:

```xml
<alignment id="alignment" dataType="hiddenNucleotide2">
...
</alignment>
```

Similarly, when constructing a 12x12 MMM composed of three CTMC models, the XML element needs to be adjusted as follows:

```xml
<alignment id="alignment" dataType="hiddenNucleotide3">
...
</alignment>
```


## Specifying the Markov-modulated model




## Providing additional transition kernels



## Don't forget to log all the additional parameters








## References

O. Gascuel and S. Guindon (2007) Modelling the variability of evolutionary processes. Reconstructing Evolution: new mathematical and computational advances 2:65-99.

G. Baele, M. S. Gill, P. Lemey and M. A. Suchard (2019) Markov-modulated continuous-time Markov chains to identify site- and branch-specific evolutionary variation. Submitted.

N. Galtier (2001) Maximum-likelihood phylogenetic analysis under a covarion-like model. Mol. Biol. Evol. 18:866–873.

N. Galtier and A. Jean-Marie (2004) Markov-modulated markov chains and the covarion process of molecular evolution. Journal of Computational Biology 11:727–733.

S. Guindon, A. G. Rodrigo, K. A. Dyer, and J. P. Huelsenbeck (2004) Modeling the site-specific variation of selection patterns along lineages. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 101:12957–12962.

C. Tuffley and M. Steel (1998) Modeling the covarion hypothesis of nucleotide substitution. Mathematical Biosciences 147:63–91.


{% include links.html %}