Each parameter in the model has one or more “operators” (these are variously called moves, proposals or transition kernels by other MCMC software packages such as MrBayes and LAMARC). The operators specify how the parameters change as the MCMC runs. As of BEAST v1.8.4, different options are available with respect to exploring tree space. In this tutorial, we will use the ‘classic operator mix’, which consists of of set of tree transition kernels that propose changes to the tree. There is also an option to fix the tree topology as well as a ‘new experimental mix’, which is currently under development with the aim to improve mixing for large phylogenetic trees.

The `Operators` panel in BEAUti has a table that lists the parameters, their operators and the tuning settings for these operators:
 
{% include image.html file="modules/operator_table.png" %}

In the first column are the parameter names. These will be called things like `CP1.kappa` which means the HKY model's kappa parameter (the transition-transversion bias) for the first codon position. The next column has the type of operators that are acting on each parameter. For example, the scale operator scales the parameter up or down by a proportion, the random walk operator adds or subtracts an amount to the parameter and the uniform operator simply picks a new value uniformly within a range. Some parameters relate to the tree or to the divergence times of the nodes of the tree and these have special operators.

Each operator also has a check box (the `In use` column) which can be used to turn individual operators on and off. For example, deselecting the operators on the rate of evolution (`clock.rate` and `Substitution rates and heights`) will fix the rate to the initial value. The initial value for a parameter is set in the `Priors` table.

The next column, labelled `Tuning`, gives a tuning setting to the operator. Some operators don't have any tuning settings so have n/a under this column. The tuning parameter will determine how large a move each operator will make which will affect how often that change is accepted by the MCMC which will in turn affect the efficiency of the analysis. For most operators (like random walk and subtree slide operators) a larger tuning parameter means larger moves. However for the scale operator a tuning parameter value closer to 0.0 means bigger moves. At the top of the window is an option called `Auto Optimize` which, when selected, will automatically adjust the tuning setting as the MCMC runs to try to achieve maximum efficiency. At the end of the run a table of the operators, their performance and the final values of these tuning settings will be written to standard output. In general, the auto-optimization of the operators works well end and nothing needs to be changed.

The next column, labelled `Weight`, specifies how often each operator is applied relative to the others. Some parameters tend to be sampled very efficiently - an example is the kappa parameter - these parameters have their operators down-weighted so that they are not changed as often.    

As of BEAST v1.8.4, different options are available with respect to exploring parameter space using the `Operator mix` option. The default is the `classic operator mix`, which is a mix of operators and weights that correspond to previous versions of BEAST. There is also an option to fix the tree topology as well as a `new experimental mix`, which is currently under development with the aim to improve mixing for large phylogenetic trees. These options turn operators on and off so can be overridden using the `In use` switches.

In most cases, no changes are required to this table but operators can be 'turned-off' which has the effect of fixing the parameter to its initial value.
